Hello friends
In this video let us understand how to analyse time
and space complexity of algorithms with examples.
First let us take a simple algorithm with just one
statement. We have int i is equal to 10 a single
assignment statement and as per our assumption it takes one
unit of time.
So the time complexity t of x t(x) is equal to
one,
we can say it takes a constant time.
So the time complexity of this algorithm is equal to
order of one O(1).
And here we have just one variable and let us say
it takes one unit of memory also,
So s of x s(x) is equal to one
So the space complexity is also order of one O(1).
Now let us add two more statements to this algorithm
i = i * 2 + 5 and
i = i++. What will be the time
complexity of this algorithm now?
As we said these two statements are also simple
statements,
so these will also take one unit time each.
So the total time taken is 1+1+1
that is t of x will be equal to 3 ( t(x) = 3 ) which
is also a constant value that is whatever the value
of i be
the time taken will be 3 units to get the
output.
So the time complexity is order of one O(1) again.
Now what about the space complexity? We have variable i
which will take one unit of memory and in second
and third statements
also we have just i and there are no other
variables,
so there is only one variable i requiring memory
so the total memory required is one unit. so
s of x s(x) equal to one which is also a constant value,
So the space complexity is equal to order of one O(1).
Now let us take another programme here to check,
if a number is positive or negative. Let us calculate
the time and space complexity of this algorithm.
Here
the first statement is the simple assignment statement so it
will take one unit of time,
Next we have a scan a statement which is also
a simple statement,
so it will also take one unit time.
Next we have a conditional statement
we have if else if else statements here.
So what happens here? for a given input either if statement
will work or else if part will work or else
part will work. Simply any one of these cases will
work for a given input.
For example if num is equal to zero only if
part will work else if and else part will be
skipped and if num equal to minus one if will
fail and else if will work and else will be skipped.
and if num equal to four
if will fail so it won't work and else if
will also fail
and hence it will be skipped and the else part
will only work. So for an input value
only one of these three will work, so we can
take one unit of time for the whole case check
and one unit of time for the inner printf
statement.
So total two units of time and the final written
statement will also take one unit time,
So the total time taken t of x is equal to
five t(x) = 5, which is a constant value
So the time complexity for this programme is order of
one O(1).
Now what about the space complexity? In the whole programme
we only used one variable num and we have only
used constance other than that,
so the memory taken is just one unit. So s of x is equal to one
s(x) = 1 which is a constant.
Hence the space complexity of this algorithm
is order of one O(1).
Now let us analyse the algorithm to find if X
is a factor of N or not.
First we have a declaration statement which will take one
unit time and the next printf statement will also
take one unit time
and the same happens with scanf statement also.
And now we have a conditional check, here for a
given value of N and X either if part will
work or the else part will work.
So for this case check we can say it takes
one unit of time and for the print statement inside
it takes one unit again.
So a total of two units will be taken for
this part only
And the final returns statement will also take 1 unit
time. So t of x equal to
t(x) = 1 + 1 + 1 + 2 + 1 = 6
and it is a constant value.
So the algorithm will take only a constant time for any
input to produce the desired output.
So the time complexity is equal to order of one O(1).
Now what about the space complexity? here we have variables
and N and X requiring memory.
So it takes two units totally
and other than that there is nothing that require memory
space here
So S of X is equal to two ( s(x) = 2 ) which is a
constant memory space.
So the space complexity of this algorithm is order of
one.
So this is how we can analyse algorithms and
find time and space complexity. In the coming videos we
will discuss more algorithms and their analysis.